/*
#  Copyright and License
#
#      Copyright (C) 2009-2010 Erwin Waterlander
#
#   License
#
#       This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
#       modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
#       published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the
#       License, or (at your option) any later version
#
#       This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
#       WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
#       MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU
#       General Public License for more details.
#
#       Visit <http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html>
#
#   Description
#
#       To learn what TOP LEVEL section to use in manual pages,
#       see POSIX/Susv standard and "Utility Description Defaults" at
#       http://www.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009695399/utilities/xcu_chap01.html#tag_01_11
#
#       This is manual page in Perl POD format. Read more at
#       http://perldoc.perl.org/perlpod.html or run command:
#
#           perldoc perlpod | less
#
#       To check the syntax:
#
#           podchecker *.pod
#
#       Create manual page with command:
#
#           pod2man PAGE.N.pod > PAGE.N
*/

=pod

=head1 NAME

dos2unix - DOS/MAC to UNIX and vice versa text file format converter

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    dos2unix [options] [-c CONVMODE] [-o FILE ...] [-n INFILE OUTFILE ...]
    unix2dos [options] [-c CONVMODE] [-o FILE ...] [-n INFILE OUTFILE ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The Dos2unix package includes utilities C<dos2unix> and C<unix2dos> to convert
plain text files in DOS or MAC format to UNIX format and vice versa. Binary files
and non-regular files, such as soft links, are automatically skipped, unless
conversion is forced.

Dos2unix has a few conversion modes similar to dos2unix under SunOS/Solaris.

In DOS/Windows text files a line break, also know as newline, is combination of two characters: a
Carriage Return (CR) followed by a Line Feed (LF). In Unix text files a line
break is a single character: the Line Feed (LF). In Mac text files, prior to
Mac OS X, a line break was single Carriage Return (CR) character. Nowadays Mac
OS use Unix style (LF) line breaks.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-c, --convmode CONVMODE>

Set conversion mode. Where CONVMODE is one of:
I<ascii>, I<7bit>, I<iso>, I<mac>
with ascii being the default.

=item B<-f, --force>

Force conversion of all files. Also binary files.

=item B<-h, --help>

Display help and exit.

=item B<-k, --keepdate>

Keep the date stamp of output file same as input file.

=item B<-L, --license>

Display program's license.

=item B<-l, --newline>

Add additional newline.

B<dos2unix>: Only DOS line breaks are changed to two Unix line breaks.
In Mac mode only Mac line breaks are changed to two Unix
line breaks.

B<unix2dos>: Only Unix line breaks are changed to two DOS line breaks.
In Mac mode Unix line breaks are changed to two Mac line breaks.

=item B<-n, --newfile INFILE OUTFILE ...>

New file mode. Convert file INFILE and write output to file OUTFILE.
File names must be given in pairs and wildcard names should I<not> be
used or you I<will> lose your files.

=item B<-o, --oldfile FILE ...>

Old file mode. Convert file FILE and overwrite output to it. The program
default to run in this mode. Wildcard names may be used.

=item B<-q, --quiet>

Quiet mode. Suppress all warnings and messages.

=item B<-V, --version>

Display version information and exit.

=back

=head1 CONVERSION MODES

Conversion modes I<ascii>, I<7bit>, and I<iso>
are similar to those of dos2unix/unix2dos under SunOS/Solaris.

=over 4

=item B<ascii>

B<dos2unix>: In this mode DOS line breaks are converted to Unix line breaks.
Unix and Mac line breaks are not changed.

B<unix2dos>: In this mode Unix line breaks are converted to DOS line breaks.
DOS and Mac line breaks are not changed.

Although the name of this mode is ASCII, which is a 7 bit standard,
the actual mode is 8 bit.

=item B<mac>

B<dos2unix>: In this mode Mac line breaks are converted to Unix line breaks.
DOS and Unix line endigs are not changed. You can also use the command C<mac2unix> to
run dos2unix in Mac mode.

B<unix2dos>: In this mode Unix line breaks are converted to Mac line breaks.
DOS and Mac line endigs are not changed. You can also use the command C<unix2mac> to
run unix2dos in Mac mode.

=item B<7bit>

In this mode DOS line breaks are converted to Unix line breaks or vice versa.
All 8 bit non-ASCII characters (with values from 128 to 255) are converted
to a space.

=item B<iso>

In this mode DOS line breaks are converted to Unix line breaks or vice versa.
Characters are converted between the DOS character set (code page) CP437 and ISO
character set ISO-8859-1 on Unix. CP437 characters without ISO-8859-1
equivalent, for which conversion is not possible, are converted to a dot. The
same counts for ISO-8859-1 characters without CP437 counterpart. CP437 is
mainly used in the USA. In Western Europe CP850 is more standard.

Another option to convert text files between different encodings is to use
dos2unix in combination with iconv(1). Iconv can convert between a long list of
character encodings. Some examples:

Convert from DOS DOSLatinUS to Unix Latin-1

    iconv -f CP437 -t ISO-8859-1 in.txt | dos2unix > out.txt

Convert from DOS DOSLatin1 to Unix Latin-1

    iconv -f CP850 -t ISO-8859-1 in.txt | dos2unix > out.txt

Convert from Windows WinLatin1 to Unix Latin-1

    iconv -f CP1252 -t ISO-8859-1 in.txt | dos2unix > out.txt

Convert from Windows WinLatin1 to Unix UTF-8 (Unicode)

    iconv -f CP1252 -t UTF-8 in.txt | dos2unix > out.txt

Convert from Windows UTF-16 (Unicode) to Unix UTF-8 (Unicode)

    iconv -f UTF-16 -t UTF-8 in.txt | dos2unix > out.txt

Convert from Unix Latin-1 to DOS DOSLatinUS

    unix2dos < in.txt | iconv -f ISO-8859-1 -t CP437 > out.txt

Convert from Unix Latin-1 to DOS DOSLatin1

    unix2dos < in.txt | iconv -f ISO-8859-1 -t CP850 > out.txt

Convert from Unix Latin-1 to Windows WinLatin1

    unix2dos < in.txt | iconv -f ISO-8859-1 -t CP1252 > out.txt

Convert from Unix UTF-8 (Unicode) to Windows WinLatin1

    unix2dos < in.txt | iconv -f UTF-8 -t CP1252 > out.txt

Convert from Unix UTF-8 (Unicode) to Windows UTF-16 (Unicode)

    unix2dos < in.txt | iconv -f UTF-8 -t UTF-16 > out.txt

See also L<http://czyborra.com/charsets/codepages.html>
and L<http://czyborra.com/charsets/iso8859.html>.

=back

=head1 UNICODE

There exist different Unicode encodings. On Unix/Linux Unicode
files are mostly encoded in UTF-8 encoding. UTF-8 is ASCII compatible. UTF-8
files can have DOS, Unix or Mac line breaks. It is safe to run dos2unix/unix2dos on
UTF-8 encoded files. On Windows mostly UTF-16 encoding is used for Unicode
files. Dos2unix/unix2dos should not be run on UTF-16 files. UTF-16 files are
automatically skipped, because they are considered binary.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Read input from 'stdin' and write output to 'stdout'.

    dos2unix
    dos2unix -l -c mac

Convert and replace a.txt. Convert and replace b.txt.

    dos2unix a.txt b.txt
    dos2unix -o a.txt b.txt

Convert and replace a.txt in ascii conversion mode.

    dos2unix a.txt

Convert and replace a.txt in ascii conversion mode.
Convert and replace b.txt in 7bit conversion mode.

    dos2unix a.txt -c 7bit b.txt
    dos2unix -c ascii a.txt -c 7bit b.txt

Convert a.txt from Mac to Unix format.

    dos2unix -c mac a.txt
    mac2unix a.txt

Convert a.txt from Unix to Mac format.

    unix2dos -c mac a.txt
    unix2mac a.txt

Convert and replace a.txt while keeping original date stamp.

    dos2unix -k a.txt
    dos2unix -k -o a.txt

Convert a.txt and write to e.txt.

    dos2unix -n a.txt e.txt

Convert a.txt and write to e.txt, keep date stamp of e.txt same as a.txt.

    dos2unix -k -n a.txt e.txt

Convert and replace a.txt. Convert b.txt and write to e.txt.

    dos2unix a.txt -n b.txt e.txt
    dos2unix -o a.txt -n b.txt e.txt

Convert c.txt and write to e.txt. Convert and replace a.txt.
Convert and replace b.txt. Convert d.txt and write to f.txt.

    dos2unix -n c.txt e.txt -o a.txt b.txt -n d.txt f.txt

=head1 LOCALIZATION

=over 4

=item B<LANG>

The primary language is selected with the environment variable LANG. The LANG
variable consists out of several parts. The first part is in small letters the
language code. The second is optional and is the country code in capital
letters, preceded with an underscore. There is also an optional third part:
character encoding, preceded with a dot. A few examples for POSIX standard type
shells:

    export LANG=nl               Dutch
    export LANG=nl_NL            Dutch, The Netherlands
    export LANG=nl_BE            Dutch, Belgium
    export LANG=es_ES            Spanish, Spain
    export LANG=es_MX            Spanish, Mexico
    export LANG=en_US.iso88591   English, USA, Latin-1 encoding
    export LANG=en_GB.UTF-8      English, UK, UTF-8 encoding

For a complete list of language and country codes see the gettext manual:
L<http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.html#Language-Codes>

On Unix systems you can use to command locale(1) to get locale specific
information.

=item B<LANGUAGE>

With the LANGUAGE environment variable you can specify a priority list of
languages, separated by colons. Dos2unix gives preference to LANGUAGE over LANG.
For instance, first Dutch and then German: C<LANGUAGE=nl:de>. You have to first
enable localization, by setting LANG (or LC_ALL) to a value other than
"C", before you can use a language priority list through the LANGUAGE
variable. See also the gettext manual:
L<http://www.gnu.org/software/gettext/manual/gettext.html#The-LANGUAGE-variable>

For Esperanto there is a special language file in x-method format. X-method can
be used on systems that don't support Latin-3 or Unicode character encoding.
Make LANGUAGE equal to "eo-x:eo".

If you select a language which is not available you will get the
standard English messages.


=item B<DOS2UNIX_LOCALEDIR>

With the environment variable DOS2UNIX_LOCALEDIR the LOCALEDIR set
during compilation can be overruled. LOCALEDIR is used to find the
language files. The GNU default value is C</usr/local/share/locale>.
Option B<--version> will display the LOCALEDIR that is used.

Example (POSIX shell):

    export DOS2UNIX_LOCALEDIR=$HOME/share/locale

=back



=head1 STANDARDS

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text_file
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carriage_return
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newline

=head1 AUTHORS

Benjamin Lin - <blin@socs.uts.edu.au>
Bernd Johannes Wuebben (mac2unix mode) - <wuebben@kde.org>,
Erwin Waterlander - <waterlan@xs4all.nl> (Maintainer)

Project page: L<http://www.xs4all.nl/~waterlan/dos2unix.html>

SourceForge page: L<http://sourceforge.net/projects/dos2unix/>

Freshmeat: L<http://freshmeat.net/projects/dos2unix>

=head1 SEE ALSO

file(1)
iconv(1)

=cut
